Functional requirements rewrite (#4)
phnx-im/docs: src/functional_requirements.md

# Functional Requirements

This section describes the functional requirements of a homeserver. Before we detail the individual requirements, we first introduce the different roles that interact with the system.

Note that while the homeserver should ultimately provide the functionality described, the entity in the given role might have to keep state and perform protocol actions to interact with the homeserver.

## Roles

A large part of the infrastructure consists of the homeserver, which is operated by the _operator_. The homeserver exposes most of its API endpoints to _clients_ of _users_ that are registered with the homeserver. The remaining endpoints of the homeserver's API are accessible to _the network_, as well as _federated homeservers_. Individuals that are registered with other homeservers are _federated users_ who run _federated clients_.

### Operator

The entity that operates a homeserver. It is assumed to have control over the domain they configure as the homeserver's _home domain_.

### The Network

> The network includes all entities that have access to the port the homeserver exposes its endpoints on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The network includes all entities that have access to the port exposing the homeserver endpoints.
```

### Users

Users are individuals that have registered as users with the homeserver and that are associated with a unique and immutable _user id_ scoped by the homeserver's home domain. Each user also has a unique _user name_. Registered users can have one or more registered clients.

The user is ultimately the entity that other users authenticate before starting a conversation.

In the context of federation, users of a given homeserver will sometimes be called _local_ users as opposed to _federated_ users.

### Clients

> A client is a piece of software associated with and run by a user that. The client holds the key material that authenticate itself (and thus the user) to other clients and their users. Each client is associated with a _client id_ that is scoped by its user's user id.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A client is a piece of software associated with and run by a user. The client holds the key material used to authenticate (and thus the user) to other clients and their users. Each client is associated with a _client id_ that is scoped by its user's ID.
```

### Federated Homeservers

> Other instances of the homeserver that are reachable via the network, where both the given and the federated homeserver have been configured to allow mutual federation. Each is assumed to be configured with its own home domain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other instances of the homeserver that are reachable via the network, where both the local and the federated homeserver have been configured to allow mutual federation. Each is assumed to be configured with its own home domain.
```

### Federated Users

> Individuals that have registered with a federated homeserver in the same way as users have with the given one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Individuals that have registered with a federated homeserver in the same way as users have with the local one.
```

### Federated Clients

> Clients run by federated users. Just like a client, but associated with a federated user instead of a (local) user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Federated clients are clients which are run by federated users. They are regular clients that are associated with a federated user instead of a local user.
```

## Functional Requirements for each Role

### Functional Requirements for Homeserver Operators

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Operators

```

1. MUST be able to configure the homeserver and manage its users locally
1. MUST be able to set the home domain of the homeserver during setup
1. MUST be able to configure federation: Either by allowlisting other homeservers by their home domain, or by allowing open federation except for a blocklist of home domains for homeservers with which federation is not desired

### Functional Requirements for the Network

1. MUST be able to register a new user

### Functional Requirements for Users

> The distinction between users their clients is difficult, because the user will perform most of their interactions with the homeserver through the client. Here, we list the operations that, while performed through the client, concern the user as their own entity and might thus also affect all of their clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The distinction between users and their clients is difficult because the user will perform most of their interactions with the homeserver through the client. The following is a list of operations performed through the client, which concern the user as their own entity and might thus also affect all of their clients.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Users

```

1. MUST be able to manage clients
1. SHOULD be able to reset the account if the last client is lost
1. MUST be able to change their user name
1. MUST be able to discover other users
1. MUST be able to initialize a connection with other users (via a two-user MLS group, implies retrieval of [KeyPackages](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-mls-protocol-16.html#section-11) of all of the other user's clients)
1. MUST be able to accept or reject a connection initialized by another (local or federated) user
1. SHOULD be able to block other (local or federated) users s.t. they don't receive messages from that user anymore

### Functional Requirements for Clients

MLS natively provides a number of group management mechanics such as membership management. The homeserver's task is thus to fulfill the role of an MLS [Delivery Service](https://www.ietf.org/id/draft-ietf-mls-architecture-08.html#section-4).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Clients

```

1. MUST be able to initialize an MLS group
1. MUST be able to asynchronously send [MLS messages](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-mls-protocol-16.html#section-7) to all members of an MLS group that it is a member of (this implies the "filtering server" role specified by the ["delivery of messages"](https://www.ietf.org/id/draft-ietf-mls-architecture-08.html#section-4.3) requirement of the MLS architecture document)
1. MUST be able to retrieve [KeyPackages](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-mls-protocol-16.html#section-11) for clients of users with a previously established connection (this implies the ["key storage"](https://www.ietf.org/id/draft-ietf-mls-architecture-08.html#name-key-storage) requirement)
1. MUST be able to send [Welcome](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-mls-protocol-16.html#section-13.4.3.1) messages to clients of users with a previously established connection

> 1. MUST be able to fetch own messages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. MUST be able to fetch their own messages
```

> 1. MUST be able to verify authenticity of MLS leaf [Credentials](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-mls-protocol-16.html#name-credentials) of clients it shares a group with (this implies at least partially fulfilling the [Authentication Service](https://www.ietf.org/id/draft-ietf-mls-architecture-08.html#name-authentication-service) role)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. MUST be able to verify the authenticity of an MLS leaf [Credentials](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-mls-protocol-16.html#name-credentials) of clients with which it shares a group (this implies at least partially fulfilling the [Authentication Service](https://www.ietf.org/id/draft-ietf-mls-architecture-08.html#name-authentication-service) role)
```

1. MUST be able to publish [KeyPackages](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-mls-protocol-16.html#section-11) (this implies the ["key retrieval"](https://www.ietf.org/id/draft-ietf-mls-architecture-08.html#name-key-retrieval) requirement)

> 1. SHOULD be able to configure notification settings of groups that it is a member of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. SHOULD be able to configure notification settings of groups of which it is a member
```

### Functional Requirements for Federated Homeservers

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Federated homeservers

```
